In my recent studies into digital humanities, I got the opportunity to contribute my own work to the plethora of online resources. I was given pages of a short story called “The yellow wallpaper” by author Charlotte Perkins Stetson and was told to convert it to a digital format using something called Text Encoding Initiative or TEI for short. TEI is a programming language that uses XML to transfer text into a digital format and we utilized the program Oxygen as a medium to create this code.
 
The process started with the distributing of pages from the short story’s manuscript so that each person in the group had their little piece of the puzzle to work on. The pages were then written up into separate editable slices on Google Documents so that we can manipulate them in a virtual space for the purpose of marking down out edits. Before we could even start programming, we had to mark down every point in the text that would require an edit later when we entered Oxygen. This included overly long spaces, crossed out words, page breaks, spelling errors, EM dashes, and so on. My four pages were relatively clear of too many unexpected edits mainly have a lot of large spaces and EM dashes to denote with a page break or spelling error occasionally. I would mark each of these points by highlighting the text and inserting a comment that explained what needed to be edited once I was in Oxygen so that each point of interest was easy to spot upon look over.
 
Once every noticeable mark was highlighted, I moved over to Oxygen to begin transferring my work into TEI. Oxygen was very intimidating at first as, being a professional programming platform, its margins were overflowing with various tools and settings that overloads your brain upon first glance. Combine that with the wall of text that hits you upon starting up a project and it really begins to look like a daunting task to use the program. 
 
However, once you navigate your way to the starting line and the few tools you need it becomes way easier to manage. I had a small programming background from high school where I used Java to code small games or robots to run mazes, so I wasn’t entirely in the dark when it came to the program but TEI was a little different from my previous languages as it was so much easier to use. Due to my previous experience, I had the idea that programming was a tedious process that always takes days on end to get a block of code working from the constant search for the smallest errors, but TEI and Oxygen streamlined that process. The edits used simple mark ups and Oxygen highlighted anything that acted as invalid code. It even had an alternate tab that allowed you to view the code in its finished form at any point.
 
Programming was never really the career path for me as I learned in high school and I went into this project expecting a repeat of all those previous troubles, but despite those previous experiences using TEI was a far more pleasant time than I anticipated. I still don’t think I will ever pick-up programming again even in the wake of this project however, I can’t deny the satisfaction I had upon using Oxygen over my previous programs. Its easy to learn and streamlined approach to programming was far better for a beginner such as myself to jump in and take the reigns of a project and I think that is what makes it such a good tool for digital humanities. Ill make sure to keep Oxygen ready in case I find myself doing further work in the field of digital humanities.
 
